I guess what I really have to be brought up today, though, we're talking Aaron Lansing, it's two and a half years since we spoke, and I think when we talked the first time, I guess what you have done here was largely responsible for Yiddish being taught in a number of institutions, and the number is really not in here, but I think you said about 16, or it might have been 660 is what the college figure is, but we actually have a student working also,
trying to confirm this.
And I don't know how far she's gotten.
It's probably not quite that many in reality.
That's a commonly used number.
What number would you... Forty, say.
So let's say about 40.
As a credit course.
But it's being taught.
Now, the most prominent example, of course, is Yale.
And I guess that continues to be the most prominent example.
There were about 10,000 volumes, I guess, which you said that election was more significant than we ever could have.
What the Yale collection did was to legitimize the whole notion that Yiddish belonged in major university libraries.
That was a major gift, as you know.
It was a $200,000 gift, and it was a very important deal.
Yale was one of the major libraries in the world.
They had not had significant Yiddish holdings up until now.
When Yale did it, it, in effect, announced to everybody else that if you really want to have a major research library, you're really going to have collections of world literature.
Yiddish has to be part of that collection.
So since then, we have set up an enormous number of collections.
I think we're up to 150 libraries around the world now that we're dealing with.
When I spoke to you two years ago, it might have been, I don't know, 30 or 40.
Well, of course, the Cold War was still on.
Now you have readier access, I guess, to Eastern Europe, which is changing.
Yeah, but it's actually not there.
These are all major university and research libraries in the United States, Europe, Japan.
No kidding.
Japan.
Yeah.
Even Japan.
Can you name me an institution in Japan?
I can look it up.
I think it's the University of Tokyo or whatever.
There's a professor there who is an ethnic Korean.
And he said that as an ethnic Korean, he began studying European history.
And he was an ethnic Korean, knowing what it means to live on the outside of Japanese society.
When he started to study the history of Europe, he was naturally gravitated towards the history of Jews.
because he could identify with their experience very directly.
And once he began doing that, although still the mainstream of Jewish scholarship looks away from Yiddish and still looks towards, you know, religion and theology and that kind of thing.
And he looked, well, I want to understand the Jews of Europe.
I've got to understand them in their own language or towards Yiddish.
And he went out to talk himself Yiddish, and now he teaches courses there.
The number, the figure that you gave me,
Yiddish as a language is not even 200 years old.
No, no.
The language is about a thousand years old.
That's what you're saying here, a thousand years.
But where does the two-century figure come in?
It's the literature itself.
Okay.
That's very important.
The language itself.
I was looking at that.
We get two sets of figures here.
The language itself is about a thousand years old.
But for almost the entire period of its history,
Jews have always, wherever they have lived, maintained a system of a linguist called internal bilingualism, which means that wherever they are, they maintain at least two Jewish languages of their own, in addition to whatever indigenous languages they might speak.
In this case, Hebrew is always one of them.
Hebrew, and to a lesser extent, Aramaic, are the holy languages.
That's the language of scholarship, language of prayer.
But the spoken languages, vernacular, usually a Jewish version of the indigenous language, which in our case is Yiddish,
But because it is that kind of dichotomy, as long as the traditional Jewish world prevailed, scholars, that is, educated men, spent their time studying legalistic texts in Hebrew, that's what you were expecting.
Almost had the same parallel of Latin.
That's right, very, very, exactly analogous.
In Yiddish, it's vernacular.
So the only literature in Yiddish during most of that period was what was called Viber Literature, V-I-B-E-R, which means women's literature, which,
was supposedly, see, women would not have been expected to learn Hebrew.
And as a result, this was didactic literature for women and for uneducated men who were not able to read Hebrew.
Didactic literature in the sense that it would retell biblical stories or popular tales, always with a moral.
But it was very limited.
There was a limited range of that literature.
It was only in the late 19th century when the old Jewish world finally began to break apart that all of this changed.
As long as the old Jewish world, based in Talmudic law, remains intact, based in concentrated communities, Jews, a kind of separate people, a separate class within a feudal society, as long as all that was in place, everything was okay, and Yiddish had a very limited literary role.
In the mid-19th century, in Eastern Europe, in Russia and Poland,
Everything began to change.
The ideas of Western Enlightenment, 100 years late, started to make their way into Eastern Europe at that point, particularly among the Jewish community.
And so reason becomes a factor, and we say, you know, we can figure out for ourselves what it means to, you know, live a decent human life.
We don't need to abide by the dictates of the minutiae of Tom Wood's laws.
People are starting to say this.
The economy is changing.
Feudalism starts to break down, and scholars start, I'm sorry, and so
there's now a chance for mobility, limited, but some mobility within a society which wasn't present before.
And also the idea of Jews living in fairly discreet communities also begins to break down.
Jews are moving out into large cities.
There's a gradual industrialization, small industry, like making clothing, that kind of stuff.
But nonetheless, the Jews are moving into cities in larger numbers.
And then after 1881, when the Russian Tsar was assassinated,
Jews were actually expelled from the villages.
They were forced into the cities.
So suddenly, all the traditional patterns break down, and Jews have to figure out how one lives in a modern world.
How do you live in an industrial world?
How do you live in a world where you're no longer defining your Jewishness by Talmudic law?
It's no longer automatically defined, as it were.
And to that point, the intellectuals have to kind of struggle for a literary language.
The first thing they do is return to Hebrew, because Hebrew was legitimate.
They're called Maschilim, these proponents of enlightenment in the Jewish world.
It's M-A-S-K-I-L-I-M.
The Maschilim set out, and first they turned to Hebrew because Hebrew's classical.
I mean, don't forget the 17th century Harvard University's commencement addresses weren't Hebrew, or the seal of Yale University had Hebrew on it.
It was a classical language.
Is it going to continue?
The Yale seal still does?
Yes, it still does.
Oh, that's funny.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, biblical Hebrew on the seal.
So, you know, the classical language along with Latin and Greek, it was pre-diaspora, and therefore it was legitimate.
It had all the kind of... Sacred.
Yeah, all the cachet of the way the Christian world viewed the Old Testament.
The Hebrew had all that kind of... Caracad.
Yeah, all that recognition going for it.
Yiddish had none of that.
Yiddish was the language of the Jewish masses, the language of women, everything about Jews that was backwards, as it was perceived at that time, that was culturally specific.
Of course, what happens is these must give them right in Hebrew to enlighten the masses, but the masses that they're trying to enlighten don't read Hebrew.
They're not well-educated.
They don't read Hebrew.
And the graduates, now we're talking like 1850s, early 1860s, one by one, some of these writers begin to get the idea that if we're really going to educate the masses, we have to do it in their own language, which is Yiddish.
reach them.
Here's a great problem, of course, because Yiddish is antithetical to everything they're trying to do.
It's this kind of new universalist, you know, classical vision they're trying to put forth there, enlightened vision.
They see Yiddish as the antithesis of this, so it's a kind of necessary evil.
Well, it tells them we're secular, too.
Yeah, well, yes, but these are already sensitive.
These are people who have already broken the traditional world and are now doing this.
So what ends up happening is that
First, it's kind of a necessary evil.
They don't really like this idea at all.
But, you know, the medium is the message, and it's only a matter of time, within 10 years, about the 1860s now, that a number of important writers, including the most important of all, the Mendele-Moychus Forum, who was the grandfather of the literature,
Mandela writes in Yiddish as a necessary evil to reach the masses.
Did he say this?
Oh, yeah, explicitly.
But he starts to enjoy it, and he starts to like the language, and he realizes what it can do.
And the more that he kind of mimics the masses to make fun of them in their own language, the more he realizes its artistic potential.
Where would I find that quote from him, you know?
Because there's something I could cite.
Yeah.
That would be wonderful.
Go back out again.
Stay again.
What he talks about.
I'm sorry.
What Mandela speaks about here is
his own reasons for not writing in Yiddish earlier is how it begins.
Now, is it alright if I quit note this, by the way?
Of course, of course.
And this is an unpublished thesis, so I'll leave the title page, too.
Yeah, alright.
We'll do all that before we leave here.
I've got a couple.
I've got Bill Reese's thesis, too.
Oh, good, okay.
Yeah, I was very interested in that period.
I only write about
four years of Mendel, the first four years of his work, because it's at that point that I see the transition taking place.
As I see it, what he ends up doing is the more he becomes aware of the artistic possibilities of the language, the more his whole kind of social theory is transformed as well, and the more he comes to identity, instead of spreading kind of bourgeois liberal enlightenment to the masses, he begins to defend the masses in their own political and economic struggles, because he identifies with them aesthetically as well.
It's an interesting transformation that takes place.
Anyway, the result of all of this is that Mendelof starts writing in Yiddish, first reads the masses, understands its artistic potential.
Other writers begin to see the same thing.
And these are all sophisticated intellectuals.
At least until the 20th century, there was no Yiddish writer who was not conversing with many other languages.
Most of these people were living their lives, although they grew up speaking Yiddish, were living their lives in other languages.
But we're so...
enamored of the artistic possibilities inherent within Yiddish that they began writing in it.
They understood that there was something in that voice that could express a point of view that they could never express in Russian or in Hebrew or in other languages.
And so suddenly the literature burst forth at that point.
Mendel's first novel is 1864, and that's usually seen as the start of modern Yiddish literature.
It's only a hundred years?
125 years old.
That's all.
It's nothing.
I agree with you.
I know.
It's a very modern literature, and what happened... I was dying when you came along.
I know, but that's why.
He starts in 1864, and by 1939, when the Nazis invade Poland, of course, that's an enormous bloat that the literature never recovers from.
And even had enough for that, there were questions about what would have happened.
But in that very brief period of time, let's say between the 1880s and 1940, roughly,
When I spoke to you before, I probably gave you a title.
I thought there were 40,000 titles in Yiddish literature.
We now think there are 50,000 titles in Yiddish literature.
This has just been revised upward.
If there's a bibliography, it's in this building, right?
It's something that you people can buy.
Well, we have a lot of it.
Of course, there's the YIVO Institute in New York, which is a Yiddish research library.
Can I talk to somebody about that?
Yeah.
There's a really knowledgeable person to speak with there.
Zachary Baker is the head librarian.
Zachary?
Right.
And what's the name of the institution again?
This is called the YIVO, Y-I-V-O, Institute for Jewish Research.
This is the major Yiddish research institute in the world.
It was founded in Vilnius in Lithuania in 1925.
Exactly.
You will give me some quotes about what you're doing.
That's right.
Of course you will.
We work very closely with them.
Actually, that's a story in itself.
This is your story, right?
I know.
I can tell you really quickly about the YIVO archive.
This is not so much books, but archival materials.
The Nazis took over the Evo in 1941 when they invaded Vilna, and they forced a number of the scholars there to work for them because they wanted to create this record of the people who were destroyed, kind of like what we do with American Indians.
I mean, they had this idea they were going to make a museum of the Jewish scholars.
Yeah, exactly.
So they forced these scholars to work for them, but the scholars, very heroic, they were smuggling books out of the building.
Oh, I like this story.
Yeah, it's a great story.
In a way, it's a nice precursor for others also.
They smuggled books out of the building, and they hid them in milk cans and buried them in the Vilna ghetto.
Where can I find out about this?
Zachary will tell you all about it.
And after the war, even the American troops came in.
They liberated a lot of that material, shifted back, forth, and then it was just reconstituted in New York City.
And some of it still ended up in the hands of the Soviets.
That's an end!
And it was still there.
This is really the whole story.
I hadn't gone to the Soviet Union yet when I spoke to you, right?
You had, I think, just the first trip, maybe.
Yeah, then we went with a second expedition as well.
What was the date you had?
February of 19th.
February, so I hadn't gone with a second expedition there.
In Vilna... Don't forget to give me your number.
Oh, sure.
In Vilna, there is a, I think it's like an old cathedral or a monastery or something, and there's a great big church, and the Soviets had used this as a place to stash away books and stuff, and it's amazing.
It's this cathedral, and books have piled up, you know, 20, 30 feet high.
We just were able to get into it.
Twenty, thirty feet high, these mountains of books in all different languages, but many Jewish books among them.
How do you feel when you see something like that?
I guess one stands in awe of the magnitude of human creativity and also the magnitude of human ignorance and indifference to bash all these things away like that.
See, you have it.
You have the virus.
I make no apologies about loving books, believe me, but I see that, you know.
I'm also interested in what's inside the books.
And that's what makes it clear, and that's how we bring in Charles.
And I also got Father Monaghan.
You ever heard of Father Monaghan from the University?
Wonderful.
They call him the Penalas Medici of San Francisco.
He got no money, and he goes out and he's just, well, that's another story, as we say, but it's great.
I've got the Catholic guy.
Great, all right, good.
Okay, Zachary's number, 212-535-6700.
Now, is this stuff, interestingly enough, is this the kind of material, does anybody who collects the material, the hateful material, does anybody collect them?
I know Yeshiva, for instance, has the famous
the Council of Trent document, which... Yeah, but I mean, the American paper material... Well, anything, I mean, the Council of Trent document.
In Jamaica is what it's called, yeah.
Is that what it's called?
Yeah.
But somebody has to preserve this.
I don't know.
Okay.
That's where you can tell you that.
I know that the B'nai Rift in America has an arc.
Okay, that would make sense.
It has a library of... That's what comes out here.
Yeah.
Okay, go on with you.
Anyway, to the Evo story itself, it's a very interesting one, because there really was real heroism in saving books there.
Also, when YIVO was first constituted, this is kind of a connection here, when YIVO was first constituted in 1925, it was convened by a number of the leading Jewish intellectuals of the day.
It's very hard for us today to realize how uncollected all these materials had been up until that point.
But, as I said, the main occurrence of Jewish scholarship at that time came out of Germany, a fairly assimilationist or apologetic model.
tended to focus on ideas and religion, not on Jews, not on the social history of the Jewish people.
For example, I'll come around with this, but for example, in the 1860s, when Heinrich Gretz, G-R-A-T-Z, who was the great Jewish historian of the 19th century, living in Germany, he wrote a six-volume history of the Jews, a definitive history of the Jews until that point.
At that point, about 80% of the Jews in the world were speaking Yiddish.
He accorded Yiddish exactly two paragraphs out of the sixth volume.
And in those two paragraphs, he characterized Yiddish writing in German.
He said, he said, it's a half-yiddish sprache.
You know what they said?
Right, yeah, right.
A half-beastial tongue.
Is that what he said?
Yeah, it was really a terrible denigration.
That's how he translated it?
Yeah.
Beastial tongue, the animal tongue.
So there's a terrible denigration that took place.
But these scholars in Eastern Europe began slowly to realize
And the greatest of them, the person who's really always been my intellectual mentor was a man named Simon Dubnov, D-U-B-N-O-W.
Yeah, Dubnov was the great Jewish historian in the 20th century.
Eventually, he was 81 years old, and he was murdered in Riga in 1941, actually by a Latvian militia.
But Dubnov began early on collecting materials, and he organized a network of what he called zamblers, which means collectors, to start collecting documents from their own communities.
Z-A-M-L-E-R-M, to start collecting materials from their own communities and shipping them to a central point.
Is there a biography, Tim?
Yeah.
There's a new biography that just came out.
You'll find it in any library that just came out.
D-U-B-N-L-W.
N-L-W, yeah.
Do you know the title of it?
I think it's called A Life Assignment.
I'm not positive for that.
I'm going to hire him this week.
Okay.
There's also an older book where you'll get information more easily.
There's a book by Dugna,
called Nationalism and History, and it has a long introduction by Koppel Tinson, P-I-N-S-O-N, and he'll tell the whole story in there.
Okay, Nationalism and History.
Who's the author of that again?
Dumno's the author, but Tinson is the one who edited it, and he had the introduction, Koppel.
Good.
We could go on all day with all these stories, but I'll just tell you a little more.
So Dumno set up this network of Zamblers, and when YIVA was established in 2005, they took over his Zambler network, expanded it,
And there ended up being these kind of, used to call them hallowed intelligentsia, half-intellectuals, all over the countryside, all these little shetlocks, these little towns, all over Eastern Europe.
There were hundreds of thousands of these towns.
And these people would collect the minutes of their communal societies going back a hundred years.
Whatever they could find, they were sending this material into medieval.
And then it was a lot of this material that then survived the war and was shipped to New York and is now there.
I'm going to have to get out and see this guy.
Oh, yeah, yeah, he's a very good guy.
I go to see everything, by the way.
Zachary is a really good guy.
He's extremely knowledgeable.
We have an arrangement with Ivo.
When we started the book center, we recognized that there had to be one definitive Yiddish research library in the world where there was a copy of absolutely everything.
So we made an arrangement with Ivo where we maintained what we call permanent loan collection there.
Whenever we collect books, as soon as we accession them, we send lists to Ivo,
They go through them.
Anything that's not in the YIVO library, we send it free.
We retain title, but we send it on indefinite loan, and it becomes part of the YIVO research.
And then the books stay there forever and ever, and that way they're always accessible.
So we've been very careful to do that.
But anyways, when I started at the Book Center, having been really such a strong intellectual influence on me, as an undergraduate and later in graduate school, he always kind of shaped my own thinking about Jewish history and what it meant.
As a result of that, I knew full well what he had done with Zamblers.
And when I started the Book Center, I figured, hmm, maybe we could revive this idea that Dubnov had used, you know, whatever it was, 75 years before or 60 years before, that perhaps I could revive this idea here.
And so I organized, in America and Canada, a network of Zamblers all over again.
But in this case, collecting not archival materials, but books themselves.
And we now have a network of almost 200 people all over North America.
Have you all collected?
Yeah, and this is how we collect it.
A lot of publicity.
I go up on the road.
I spend a lot of time on the roads lecturing.
Just let me interrupt for a second, but go ahead.
Okay.
So what I did in fact was to recreate the Nozama network in North America.
And I say these people now are all over the continent.
What we do is we send them a packet telling them how to collect books and how to launch a local Yiddish book collection drive.
And we send them press releases that they can send to their local papers.
They just put their name into it.
And we send them posters they can put around.
I'm in my office.
Could you bring me a copy of a Zambler's packet with the press release and all?
Yeah, okay.
Let me tell you a little more about the Zambler Center.
The Zambler Center have been collecting books all over the country.
They've been extraordinary.
There are some amazing people who do this work.
I'll give you a few examples of the people who are still alive.
A lot of our examples have passed on since the older people, and now there are a lot of younger people doing this.
When Pearl Ann is the organizer, you'll talk to her for a minute.
For example, there's a woman who lived in an old commune of left-wing Jews, mostly Jewish, Yiddish-speaking anarchists, that was up in Peekskill, New York, in Crompile, New York, named Sorel Skolnik.
When we met her, she was probably already in her early 80s when we first began.
But a woman with amazing dignity and extraordinarily strong and poised and intelligent, well-educated woman.
Worked all her life as a seamstress, you know, making her a living.
But she used to teach at night.
She had a great love of Yiddish and Russian literature and used to teach two nights a week courses in each literature.
And when she heard about us, she became one of our most active Zamblers.
A woman, utterly unsentiment, but really
You know, a real profound people's intellectual.
And she had an old car, she had an old Dodge Dart, like a 60-something Dodge Dart.
And she started driving all over Westchester County, collected thousands of books for her.
And she had a stroke, unfortunately, but she's still alive.
What's her name once again?
S-O-R-E-L-L, S-O-R-E-L-L, S-K-O-L-N-I-K.
Okay, can I name her?
Oh, absolutely.
To pay credit to her?
Absolutely.
Yeah, and another person was, well, there's a person named Jacob Schaefer, who was actually just out here for a program, S-C-H-A-E-F-E-R.
Why not?
Yes.
Jacob was a survivor, came from the city of Kovnev, Kamis, in Latvia, survived the Holocaust.
His wife and his five children were killed in Auschwitz, but he survived.
Came to America, worked all his life as a tailor in New York City.
And he told, he said, you know, I always hated being a tailor, but it was the only way in which he could make a living.
When he finally retired, he went out to Los Angeles and found out above us and became our most active Zambler ever.
And he also had an old car, an old Chevy Nova.
He has an old Chevy Nova, and he would drive all over Santa Monica and Vifax and Venice, California.
I'm just going to write him down before we get a Schaefer.
Yeah, rounding up books from old Jews.
And he made an arrangement.
Come on in.
He made an arrangement with the Workman's Circle, an old organization in L.A., to ship the books to us, and probably collected about 40,000 books in a while, and he's still alive.
This is Nick Bashmaker, who's a writer who's writing a book about bibliomania, and he's writing about a lot of people who collect books in bibliomania, and Ferland Margamit runs our special conferences, but also runs the book collection.
Sit down for one second.
So, we had spoken once before, about two and a half years ago, and I had never mentioned... Let's take my tape.
Why don't we just identify the woman who just walked in?
Yeah.
Go ahead.
All right.
My name is Pearl Ann Margalit, and I work with our volunteer... Could you spell it to me, Pearl Ann?
...M-A-R-G-A-L-I-T.
And Pearl Ann is... Pearl E-A-R-L.
Yeah, I can understand.
Okay.
With all the six things.
With a different accent, too.
So it complicates life.
Go ahead.
I work with the volunteers who are known as sounders throughout the country.
I'm actually going to give you a list here.
I don't know if you want that.
These are people who have officially signed up.
Although we have a lot of people who collect books for our volunteers.
in full verbatim as well.
But these are the people who I know I can call upon at any given time, at any emergency, and I'll gladly help out.
How long have you been working with Aaron?
I think it's about five years.
Yeah, I think so, yes.
It doesn't seem that long.
Do you share the passion, the energy that he so clearly projects?
Oh, absolutely.
Can't you see my face live part?
Yeah, I really do.
To me, in a sense, it was a little bit of a career change, although I was reared in a Yiddish-speaking household.
You just anticipated my next question.
Yeah, my parents are both Holocaust survivors.
So after the war, they happened to move down to South Africa and continue to speak Yiddish.
What accounts for the British accent?
Well, South Africa, one of the former colonies, a quasi-British accent, not quite.
And where were they survivors from?
Which country?
Well, from Poland and Lithuania.
Both had very interesting little tales.
I was very typical of people of my generation who really didn't quite feel comfortable about having parents who had a different accent and slightly different mannerisms and all that and it was really strange because I don't know if I've ever said that to you Erin but I had to leave home and go so far away to really truly appreciate
everything that they had imparted to me.
So, you know, that's why I kind of speak with an amazing passion.
Are there phone numbers there for Jacob Schaefer and Sorrel?
Yeah.
Is Sorrel able to contact her?
Sorrel, I spoke with her last week, and even her speech pattern has improved.
I won't bother her if you don't.
I mean, you pay tribute to her, which I think that's adequate.
Jacob also is getting older now.
I think that Morris Wilder is also a very special person.
That's a good guy to talk about.
He's American-born.
But another one, he's collected inordinate numbers of books.
He offers his own passion.
You have to understand that as much as I'm passionate here about what we do, over the country, these people who are collecting books... Synergistic is the word.
I mean, all the energy kind of... These people really care.
People care about books.
And, of course, the love of books goes very deep in Jewish culture.
And it's more than just an incidental obsession.
It was really the key to survival.
No, I know about the Genesia idea.
Yeah, Genesia, right.
Genesia.
And I've been actually, I'm trying to find some information.
I understand they found one in Cairo.
Yeah, it's a very famous Solomon.
I think I have some stuff on that.
Yeah.
But someone wants to say, books are Jews' portable homeland for people without a country of our own.
Say that a little slower.
That books are the portable homeland of the Jewish people.
Because the people without a country of our own
our national identity resides in literary text, resides in the written word.
And that, I think, is why the zombies who are out there have this almost in their, you know, it's bread in the bone.
It is such a deep and profound part of one's consciousness.
It's been essential to survival, I guess.
Exactly.
And we all know this.
I could never as a kid.
I mean, it's so funny, but just
It's a kid, no matter what book we were reading, if we ever dropped a book, my parents would always have us pick it up.
Even if it was a book that your father had anything, anything.
During the 60s.
That's right, that's right.
Exactly, exactly.
And I think most youth grew up with that kind of thing, and these authors therefore understand that there's a culture in danger, and they respond with such a... You mentioned that occasionally, and I was at a bar mitzvah a couple weeks ago, and I asked the rabbi about whether or not there are, in fact, any periodic funerals or books.
He told me to get in touch with the Jewish, some council in Boston.
The Jewish Book Council, maybe?
Some council.
I'd love to go to one of these things.
Yeah, they have one.
I'm just arranging out for another level.
You are?
I really am.
Yeah, they just tell me about this.
You're going to have one?
We won't do it, but we'll turn the books over to someone who will then bury these books.
Who would I talk to?
I mean, I'd love to just go through one of these.
It's just amazing for it now.
You could speak to the person who's in charge of the warehouse, not a Jeffrey.
I'm going down there from here.
Oh, yeah.
Ask Jeffrey about it.
Jeffrey.
Wouldn't that be interesting?
Oh, yeah.
I might want to.
It's very, very interesting.
Well, I mean, moving.
I mean, to me, these things are life.
One of my favorite titles of the book is Books Are Not Life, But Then What Is?
And that's, you know, that's a book from 1970.
Yeah.
They are.
Go ahead.
The only difference in the funeral I went to is that instead of having people dig out the grave, they had a backbone there because it was so big.
They had a what?
A backbone to dig.
Oh, really?
The Rabbi said that occasionally what they will do is if there's, for some reason, if there's a funeral of an infant or a child that they might combine that with.
Apparently they will.
It's it, but I guess.
It certainly shows that it may be acceptable.
Yeah, it does.
I'm sorry.
Okay.
What do you want to know about the Wilbur?
Let's start.
Go ahead.
Where are they from, the Wilbur?
They are both, I think they're both New Yorkers.
Oh, great.
And besides being very involved with, you know, the Yiddish Book Center, they also are very keen photographers, and they're very involved with the bridge building project in the New York school system.
And another one of their passions was being informing people about the Chinese culture.
So they have... But they really love cultures.
They have a small house, I don't know, Brooklyn somewhere.
They collect as well for themselves?
Yeah.
No, no.
So the satisfaction of collecting... You have to kind of go and see to just appreciate the setup there.
Small, you know, modest, you know, in a class house in Brooklyn somewhere.
There's a back alley with a garage there.
Fill it up with books.
Every time we go to New York, which is maybe every month, every two months now, you know, we have books to pick up from them.
And I don't know how they do it exactly.
They're not young.
Well, they're both in their late 70s, and they're extraordinary in terms of their commitment and dedication.
You know, they get out there on snowy, icy days.
They have great good humor is why I think you'd enjoy them, though.
And these are different.
These are not Europeans who are kind of saving their own culture exactly.
These are people who were born here who really still have that connection.
Are there numbers there also?
Yes, there are numbers.
Oh, that's wonderful.
Mars and Sarah Wildor.
Mars, that's M-A-U-R.
M-O-R-R-I-S.
Mars and Sarah.
Sarah Wildor.
Two L's, one L's.
Two L's.
The number is 718-251-3855.
Good.
Not only would they like to talk to you, you'll get a good meal out of it, too.
Great.
I just want to get this to you.
We need to update it because we've moved, but all the information is reasonably up to date, and I'm sure you'll find it very well.
Thank you so much.
Just for sure, it's funny because this I designed, this is a fact before we gave it to four designers, and I did this myself, and this was done like in 1980.
I think it's very pretty for me.
Well, I wish you best of luck.
Thanks so much.
Very serious.
I have one bit of news that's relevant to what I'll just tell you.
I just came back and started at a summer camp in Pennsylvania where there are leaders of these beneath-birth youth organizations from around the country.
These are kids 16 and 17 years old.
And this year, more than ever before, used the enthusiastic response of these kids.
And what they agreed to do is they are now going to organize these youth chapters as collectors around the country.
and organized collection drives in about a half dozen major cities.
So now, not only do we have all the books collecting, we'll have these kids collecting for us as well.
It's very exciting.
It's a brand new development.
That's it.
So we'll get all that information nicely from you, Aaron.
Thanks, Sophia.
You know what we do for people who collect this packet.
Some are more active than others.
Some are very, very active.
Well, again, the focus is on
I know you put them in these posters and they put these up on your telephone poles and Jewish delicatessens and that kind of thing.
When you originally started this, you thought maybe a two-year commitment.
Now it's your life, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
And one of the things that you had said last time, and I noticed, you said your mother wonders when she loves, she's so proud of what you're doing.
But when are you going to find yourself a good Jewish wife?
Oh, since I spoke to you last, I am not only married, but we have a baby now.
Congratulations.
I noticed the ring there, and I said, it's wonderful.
Thank you very much.
That's wonderful.
Your name?
Sarah Rysel.
Ah, I have two great mother-in-law.
Great.
So anyway, how do you spell the middle name?
R-A-Y-Z-L.
Okay.
Sarah Rysel.
Great.
Hadn't slowed down the intensity for the project.
Having gotten married?
No, I just had my wife to help me now.
Actually, not in the least.
What's your wife's name?
Gail.
It's very interesting because
I probably told you when you were here, whatever that was, two years ago, that things would eventually slow down in collecting books.
It hasn't happened yet.
It's getting embarrassing.
I get up every year at our annual board meeting and I say, well, I think that book collection has now slowed down.
And it's still, it's a consistent 50,000 books a year coming in right now, no matter what we do.
And what's going up?
The number's increasing.
It's getting upwards of 10,000 maybe going out now.
So this is still, you're still gathering and preserving this.
We just had a conversation this morning.
It's not in and out, in other words.
Not yet.
But it eventually will.
I mean, the number of books we send out has been doubling every year.
It's still a repository as much as... Yes, but ultimately a clearinghouse as well.
I say the number of books going out has doubled every year in the past five years, which is very significant.
And still all to institutions?
No, to individuals as well, if we have enough duplicate copies of the books.
Is your policy still absolute that you will not buy a book?
Yeah.
We don't like books.
That's important.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
We've never found the need to be doing that.
But, I mean, it's quality, too, I think.
That's right.
Except with new books, of course.
Of course.
But never used books.
Okay.
So, Ash, you told me the last time that every month you duel with bankruptcy so often that it's almost
they revere a part of life.
Is it still a shoestring?
It's a million-dollar budget, but it's still a shoestring, a million-dollar budget.
It's a big struggle even now.
Our membership continues to grow.
The number of libraries have established growth.
The other part is that, since I spoke to you, we've increased the educational work dramatically now.
We've always recognized there are three phases to the work.
One was collecting books.
Second, distributing them, getting them back into use.
But the third, in effect, is letting the world know what's inside these books.
I probably told you we'd started these summer programs years ago.
We're expanding all of that now in a lot of dramatic ways.
Starting this winter, we'll be running a week-long program for college students, and we now have a vastly expanded summer internship program.
Have you been getting our publications?
I haven't, and I would like to be on your mailing list.
The next issue of our magazine is just coming up, but I'll give you the last issue, which we did.
They sent me that one.
I asked for it.
That was one up in Nova Scotia where they planned all these new events up there.
So we're doing a lot of work, but I'd like to be at a... This is another reason why I'm here.
It could be brought up to date, but I... Put you on right now.
Once my book is out and there's a little income, you know, maybe I can... Who knows?
Have you ever heard of a guy named Toby Holtzman in Michigan, by the way?
All right, that's okay.
I've dropped your name around to people who might be able to help.
Michael Zinman.
Do you know Michael?
No.
I should have felt it.
Anyone you can put in touch with, though, we will get.
I should just say, the last thing we're doing in terms of books now is I just the other day had a conversation, and we are about to branch out energetically into South America now.
Energetically.
Energetically, yes.
We've been collecting books in a very limited way in Argentina.
And I'm not sure when.
It's probably since I spoke to you last.
We had a huge find down there.
There's a... In Argentina.
Yeah, there's a man named Mark Swiatlo who has been collecting books.
A Polish Jew who had lived in Argentina and now lives in Florida.
And he's been collecting books from Florida Atlantic University.
And he's been working with us as well.
And he went down there and he found... There was a series of books.
We have a whole article about this that you can read in one of our back issues.
There was a series of books...
It was published in Argentina right after the war.
It was 175 titles.
Many of them were Holocaust survivors, memoirs of survivors of the Holocaust, but others were cultural and historical studies of communities in Eastern Europe, some literary works as well.
These books have been out of print for years and years, and everyone thought they were unavailable.
And this guy went down and found 3,000 unsold copies of these books in October.
some kind of warehouse garage or something of Buenos Aires, and he managed to get them out of there and ship them up here, and so we now have those as well.
But we think there are several hundred thousand books in Buenos Aires alone, and many more books in Brazil and in Uruguay and in Mexico, and even some in Costa Rica.
I had to get them here.
Yeah, so we're starting a major expedition in...
In January, right after we finish our winter program for college students, my wife and I and the new baby will fly down.
Yeah, we'll fly down.
She's already well-traveled.
We're going to fly down to Costa Rica.
And with the help of a woman there, who's the head of the Jewish day school in Costa Rica, who's a native Yiddish speaker and Spanish speaker, we'll then go from there on to Argentina.
where we'll begin organizing a whole collection operation down there, in a sense replicating what we've done here and arranging for shipments.
So exciting.
Yeah, and we now have a group in South Africa working with doing collections.
You said your life course is set, isn't it?
There's plenty of work to do.
I think that 10 years from now, 20 years from now, I'll be spending a lot less time rescuing books.
But I'll have, in a sense, even more work to do at that point.
How old are you now?
I'm now 37.
One project we've begun is to try to reprint works of Yiddish literature.
There are many titles of which we already don't know.
And the result of that is the same thing.
Really?
Yes, Messjith historical society continues to publish things, which we've started.
That's great.
The Adams Family Project is one of their things, you know.
But he started that 200 years ago.
So what we'll do is we will... That's great.
We're going to do more than just reprinting.
The easier thing would be to just photograph the books that do facsimile reproduction and offset.
But that's not...
good enough, because what's needed is that we have to reset the books in modern orthography so the students can read them readily.
Yiddish spelling wasn't standardized until yesterday.
Very, very recently.
Standardized the spelling, but even more importantly than that, in any given Yiddish book, between 15 and 20 percent of the words do not appear in any published Yiddish dictionary.
These are words that come from Ukrainian and Russian and other languages, or they are difficult concepts that you just cannot find in the dictionary.
So we have this big project, and we're beginning.
That's why I was excited about this meeting that's about to come this afternoon.
What we'll do is develop a database of all the words, including all the inflected forms of all the words that appear in the two major published Yiddish dictionaries.
And then we will start entering entire Yiddish novels into the computer, and then run them against the database, and then automatically identify all the words in the given text that aren't in the dictionary.
Do you have a mainframe?
No, it's solved on a...
We have a Vax, but this will be done on PCs.
And then we will identify the words that aren't in the dictionary, and then work with older Jews who are still around and scholars to help us identify these, not only words, but also phrases and just cultural oddities, things that are no longer recognizable to the modern reader.
And what we will do is end up producing fully annotated editions of Yiddish literature, where at the bottom of each page of Yiddish text will be English language footnotes, translating words and explaining.
those culturally specific things that wouldn't be recognizable to future readers.
In doing that, we feel it will lay an infrastructure whereby students 50 or 100 years from now, long after the native Yiddish-speaking Jews from Eastern Europe were gone, the students will still have access to the literature.
So that's another big project.
And the biggest project of all that I think will take certainly the rest of my life is really letting the world know why this literature is important.
I mean, as I see Yiddish literature, I think it's critical in the scheme of Jewish history
because it's a bridge literature.
It's a bridge between two epochs of Jewish history.
You have, I mean, if you saw kind of one great epoch... E-P-O-C-H.
Right.
If you saw one great epoch of Jewish history, which began, you know, which existed at the time when Jews were living in their own country in Israel, and then ends in 135, or in 70, when the temple was destroyed, and 135 after the defeat of Bar Kokhba by the Romans,
At that point, that was when Jews, you know, the diaspora kind of officially begins.
Jews really start spreading out in much larger numbers than before.
And they have to reconstitute Jewishness.
How do you have a Jewish identity which exists without a territorial base?
And that's where the Talmud is written over a period of several hundred years.
And the Talmud becomes a bridge.
It codifies the knowledge that it had existed before that point and lays the foundation for Jewish life in the New World.
That world prevails for 1,800 years.
The late 19th century comes.
the challenge of rationalism and industrialization happens, takes place, and then it's lecture all the time.
So then Jews have to then figure out how to live in the modern world.
Yiddish becomes the language again in which they remember the immediate past, lay the foundation for the future.
It doesn't matter that it won't continue.
It doesn't matter that Jews have now moved on to other languages.
The fact is that that first moment of transition
But now we get to the early stage of what's called the Mishnah, or the early part of the Talmud, takes place in Yiddish.
And Yiddish literature is therefore a critical bridge between two worlds, between two epochs.
And for that reason, we have to contend with it.
If Jews today, the American Jewish community, if we're going to know what it means to live as Jews in the modern world, we can't ignore the very first body of literature in which Jews confronted the modern world.
All of that becomes absolutely critical.
When you started, you were told, why waste your time in a dead language?
Right.
That's 10 or 12 years or so ago.
Yeah.
How do you feel now?
I don't hear that very much anymore.
Is the battle being, I hate to use that as a metaphor, but... Yes, the battle is being won.
I think consciousness is being raised.
I think that gradually, well, even five years ago, when I would go to major universities and try to speak with librarians about why they should have Yiddish books,
I was still greeted with a certain measure of skepticism.
I think partly as a result of the Newman collection, the collection we set up at Yale, but also partly as a result of just a greater understanding of what history means.
I mean, historiography generally has changed more and more towards social history.
And when you look at social history of Jews, so you look at Jews as a people, you can't help but look at Yiddish, the language that 80% of them were speaking for the last thousand years.
And therefore, when I go to university libraries today, people understand that.
Yes, we know that Yiddish books belong in libraries.
How can you help us to get those collections?
And even when I speak to the same people in the Jewish establishment who had kind of dismissed this work or denigrated this work 12 years ago, even there, there's more resonance.
The fact that we have a thriving organization with 13,000 members is already proof that Jews care, that this is important.
And it's funny, the greatest resonance sometimes comes from young people.
who don't know enough to be prejudiced against this, who just take it at face value.
Which is really the target audience.
Of course.
Ultimately, that is the future, and that's what we have to address ourselves to.
So that's very exciting.
So I guess the answer is, I don't hear the challenge that Yiddish is dead so much anymore.
I mean, I think people are beginning to learn.
Our work has been successful in any way.
It's helped to change that consciousness.
I mean, I think I've probably told you this before, even the books themselves were such a powerful metaphor.
You know, it's one thing to let a culture kind of fall into disuse.
It's a very different thing to have to be faced with that, to really see it before your eyes and to understand that someone says to you, look, it's not only that we're losing Yiddish culture, we're literally throwing it away.
At this very moment, there were 8,000 books sitting in a garbage dumpster about to be thrown out unless we do something about it.
I think that helps to shock people into wakefulness and let them realize that something has to be done.
It's like looking at the deteriorating marvel at the Aquapolis.
We've got to do something.
I'm using my Greek background now.
That's right.
Somebody has to do something.
Do you still go into the annex at night by yourself?
Not that the images...
I may even start with that.
I don't know if it's different.
Because with everything that's happening in your life, you're doing 200 miles an hour, sometimes you go in and you have to say, my God.
Yeah, it's still happening.
Yeah, I don't go in there in search of religious experience.
I go in there because a lot of people have gone off rough pigeon inside office.
But absolutely.
It happens regularly.
Now even more so.
I think as I get older, as I've had a child, my perceptions of all this perhaps deepen, if anything.
So rather than becoming inured to the sight of a million books and taking it for granted, just the opposite has to come to appreciate it more and more, really, what's here.
Also, as the last of the older generation passed on, the books become all that more precious to me.
I understand more and more how they're really... No, I understand more and more how they're really... They are the repository of that world.
Whatever we'll live of Jewish life in the past thousand years,
will live in those books.
How old is your child?
She's now nine months old.
Nine months, so she was born in October of 1991.
October what?
October 14, 1991.
Great.
Yeah, it changes everything.
Validates your life in a way that you... It validates my life and also validates what I do with my life.
It reminds me all the more for whom I am saving these books.
So I think it's become very important.
Did you meet your wife in context with
We were fixed up on a blind date by one of my professors.
And one other thing before the tape runs out on this plane, tell me a little bit of how we got here.
We're no longer in a brick place.
Our wonderful brick schoolhouse
was leased to us at a very minimal rent by the town of Amherst for 11 years.
Wonderful.
And the school population of Amherst is a thriving academic community, and the school population has been increasing dramatically.
And this year they had no choice but to take back the building to open it up as a school again.
This year being for the fall of... The fall of 1991.
Fall of 92.
Oh, upcoming.
Yeah, okay.
So last... So you just moved on here, then?
Three weeks ago.
You've only been in here three weeks?
Yeah, and we ran a summer program for 150 people in the midst of it.
Wow.
There's more than three weeks now, sorry.
Well, I'm fine.
June 10th morning.
Okay.
Time moves so quickly right now.
So, go ahead.
Anyway, you got kicked out of that building, basically.
We had to leave.
We were frantically searched about.
Told you had to leave.
Yes.
Yes, right.
There's a more gentle way.
Yes, I will accept your wording on that.
They might take umbrage at that.
No, no, we weren't.
Actually, the truth is, the town was very gracious about all of this, and they really could not have been more accommodating, and we couldn't be more appreciative of that.
But they needed the building back, and we had to leave the building.
Eventually, the president of Hampshire College, a man named Gregory Prince, found a temporary building for us near his campus.
It was an old, it's not old, it was a metal building, a little butler building, that had been used as the sales office for a condominium complex.
And...
they were going to give the building to the college, the condominium complex retirement village, was going to donate the building to the college for our use.
And we were going to move in.
It didn't even have windows.
We'd have to cut windows into it.
We were getting ready to do all of this.
We were about to move.
This was in May.
And it turned out that the land the building was on was not owned by the retirement village.
It was owned by another condominium complex.
And they decided they didn't want us there.
So here we are.
We had like two weeks to get out of this building.
We had no place to go.
And we couldn't afford commercial rents.
We really did know what to do.
and we phoned Mount Holyoke College, who had been very helpful to us over the years.
And Mount Holyoke said, well, as a matter of fact, they had been bequeathed this mansion.
This is a 20-room mansion that had belonged to Joseph Skinner, who was a major industrial magnate of Holyoke, silk mills and satin mills of Holyoke.
Skinner died in 1947 and left this building to the college with the understanding that his daughter could live here for as long as she lived.
She died at the age of 90-something just a few years ago.
The college has had the mansion, hasn't quite known what they wanted to do with it, and they agreed to rent this to us for a dollar a year.
For how long?
For at least the next three years.
Would it be nice to keep the fit like you stayed here?
Actually, we have even more ambitious long-term plans.
The last development since we last spoke is we are going to be building a building of our own in which we will consolidate our entire operations.
Most likely it will be on or adjacent to the campus of Hampshire College.
I read someplace that Hampshire has actually had some kind of affiliation.
Yeah, and we're negotiating, because I'm a Hampshire alum.
Right.
We're negotiating the specifics of this right now.
But what it looks like will happen is the Book Center will end up owning somewhere 10 acres of land, either on that campus or on another campus, most likely in Hampshire.
And we'll build there not only our offices,
We'll also build a building for a large part of the book collection.
We can't afford to build for all of them.
But we'll give you an academic affiliation.
Which is great.
And the other part is that Hampshire will then want us to build a conference center.
And we will build an educational center with classrooms and an auditorium so that we can run conferences all year round.
Where all year we can be bringing people to the books where they can come and explore Yiddish culture in various ways.
Lecture centers.
I'm so excited about it.
Yeah, we're really proud.
Yeah.
And also we'll have programs for kids as well.
And the other part of it, there will be a big exhibit hall.
We'll develop our realm, not quite a museum, that's too static a word, but an exhibit center, which will exhibit not only the books, but the culture they represent in very lively, dynamic, interactive ways.
You still have the only linoclite machine, is that down there?
I'm going to take some pictures when I get out of here.
Did you see the article on the Wall Street Journal about that?
No.
Okay, I'll give you a clip.
Okay, I'll see.
It's very funny, the Wall Street Journal picked up on this story a year later and ran an article in which they actually ran the headline of the story.
Oh, nice.
So it's the first time ever in the history of the Wall Street Journal.
So you'll see that as well.
Jocelyn's going to... I don't want to take up too much of your time.
This is more than I ever expected to get.
But I would like to... You want the quote of this?
Yes, man.
And the title page also.
Yeah.
But share this finger at the...
a number of significant challenges for the historian or literary critic because he writes originally in Yiddish but translates immediately into English.
He does the translation himself?
He works with translators to do it.
We should make it past tense, of course.
Yeah, works with translators to do it.
And the result was that he tended to polish the English version more than the Yiddish.
The Yiddish was the original, so it becomes very difficult to learn.
So we know what version to work with when you're studying.
So many writers who I've interviewed over the years, I'm related to this book,
will tell you they do not feel, even if they're conversant in the language, that somebody else should translate it.
Because the temptation then is to create another work.
That's very interesting.
And, you know, I'm surprised how the artist, the Greek guy, you know, he writes in English now.
He's forced himself to write in English, but he doesn't want to translate it back to his native language.
Because he says, I'm fooling around.
I'm changing the writing.
You know, then it becomes a different work.
What did Maverick?
He's the honorary chairperson of our board of directors.
And Bela continues to be, Saul Bela continues to be?
Bela's a friend.
A friend.
Yeah.
Would he be interested in what Mike's trying to contact, do you think?
I don't think he knows enough about our work.
I've had dinner with him, but I don't think he knows enough about our work to be able to speak about it.
You know, he's just more an admirer from afar.
He hasn't been integral.
But he might give a great quote, though.
It might be useful.
He'd give a great quote about his literature.
Yeah, you could try that.
And what you're doing.
Yeah, he's living in Vermont now.
I think.
I don't want to steal, take away from what focus of the article, the essay is going to be.